---
layout: post
title:  "Eigendecomposition vs SVD"
date:   2025-06-24
categories: [Algebra]
---

In this post, all vector spaces are assumed to be real and finite-dimensional.
<br>

First of all, eigenvalues are properties of linear transformations (from a space to itself), 
while singular values are properties of general linear maps. 

<br>
Eigenvalues are invariant under matrix similarity ($A \approx P^{-1}AP$ for invertible $P$), which corresponds to describing the same tranformation using a new (not necessarily orthonormal) basis. 
Singular values are invariant under orthogonal equivalence ($A \approx P A Q^T$ for orthogonal $P$ and $Q$), which corresponds to choosing different orthonormal bases for the domain and the image. 

<br>
Real eigenvalues are the real roots of the characteristic polynomial. 
Thus, an n by n real matrix can have fewer than n real eigenvalues. 
E.g., a 2D rotation matrix generally has no real eigenvalues. 
Meanwhile, even with n eigenvalues, the eigenvectors may not be a full basis, as an eigenvalue's geometric multiplicity (the dimension of its eigenspace) can be less than its algebraic multiplicity.
E.g., the shear matrix $\begin{pmatrix} 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix}$ has eigenvalues 1 and 1, but there is only one eigenvector $[1,0]^T$. 
<br>

These facts imply that not all real transformations are diagonalizable, or can be described purely as stretching along a basis. 
In fact, the simplest form under similarity is the Jordan normal form. 

<br>
As a special case, real symmetric matrices are always diagonalizable (under orthogonal similarity), and all their eigenvalues are real. 

<br>
In contrast, SVD can diagonalize any linear map because it allows to use different orthonormal bases for the domain and the image. 
Also, singular values are always real and non-negative, as singular value of $A$ is the square root of the eigenvalue of the PSD matrix $A^TA$. 
